The COllaborative Model for Multiscale Atmospheric Simulation (e.g., COMMAS) has been primarily developed over the last 20 years by Drs. Lou Wicker and Ted Mansell at the NOAA National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman OK.  The code is a non-hydrostatic atmospheric model built to study supercell thunderstorms in realtively simple (usually homogenous) environments.  The code has its roots in the original Klemp-Wilhelmson cloud model built at NCAR and the Univ. of IL in the late 1970s.

Originally constructed by Dr. Lou Wicker while a PhD student and then post-doc scientist at the Univ. of IL in the late 1980's and early 1990's, the core code originally was attached to an adaptive grid interface driver written by Dr. Bill Skamarock of NCAR.  Over the years, while the adaptive capability has been removed, the model numerics and microphysical parameterizations have been improved considerably.  The model is similar to one built by Dr. George Bryan built while he was a student at Penn State in the and is now being developed and maintained at NCAR(called CM1).

Dr. Wicker joined NSSL in 1999 and continued to develop its capabilities.  During the early 2000's, Dr. Ted Mansell began work on the code by developing new multi-moment microphysical packages for the model.  In conjunction with this work, a state-of-the-art cloud electrification parameterization was also added.  Dr. Mansell and his student Allison Silvera also developed an MPI version of the code.  At this point, the model was renamed NCOMMAS, for the NSSL COMMAS.

During the past six years, Dr. David Dowell (now at NOAA GSD Laboratory in Boulder CO), Dr. Wicker, and Dr. Mansell developed an ensemble Kalman filter capability to help test the newly emerging EnKF methods for generating analyses of convective storms from Doppler radar data.  This remains one of the core uses for the software today.  Because the code is rather simple to understand and lacks much of the complexity (and capability) of full NWP models such as NCAR's Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, this enables rapid development and testing of new ideas and methodologies before moving them into a more complex modeling system.  In 2010, NCOMMAS was also imported into the DART (Data Assimilation Research Testbed) EnKF system developed at NCAR.

The assimilation system and non-hydrostatic atmospheric model is now called enNCOMMAS, for the EnKF NSSL COMMAS model system.